Good afternoon, Ms.
Locke. Um, and thank you for your patience.
We're half an hour late
because question time was half an hour late,
which governs our, um, lives.
Uh, govern, governs our, uh, timings here.
So now we've got you for 10 minutes, um,
for your presentation.
You can take your submission as read, but we'd appreciate
and you'll obviously have some comments,
but we'd appreciate some time for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. So, as you know, degrowth ROA
has requested that Parliament investigate a tradable,
tradable energy quota system.
And essentially this is just
where a decreasing quota would be placed on energy use.
So at present emissions from fossil fuel use in New Zealand
is currently placed through the emissions trading scheme,
which was obviously it was established in 2008.
And the ETS assists us in meeting both our domestic
and international targets.
And under the current government,
the ETS is the main climate change tool
and it's a key component of the lead strategy.
And the New Zealand ETS considers
to be the preferred instrument
for emissions pricing in New Zealand.
And it puts a price on emissions
and creates a reward for activities that reduce emissions.
So under the current policy framework,
the government has no intention of replacing the N-Z-D-T-S
with another system such as a tradable quota system.
Now, the a quota system is something that was looked at
as part of the previous government's work program
around agricultural missions.
And it was looked at under
as a tradable methane quota system with farmers
with farm processes receiving an annual methane quota.
The main benefit of a quota system is essentially
that it's a volume-based system as opposed
to a BRI price based system,
and it really ensures that emissions are reduced
to a predetermined level,
which would support the achievement of our domestic
and international targets.
However, under that previous work program,
the tradable methane quota system was considered too complex
and costly to ad admin, administer and participate in,
and it wasn't pursue at that point in time.
And this is why it's the ministry for the environment's view
that a quota system
just wouldn't work under this government's lease cost
strategy and the fact that we've already got an
ETS in place.
Alright, thank you. I I just got one question.
So when you talked about, um, the consideration of this
and you talked about the, the on farm methane, did you
look at the, this exclusively given, given
that, um, agriculture is currently outside the ETS, um,
did you look at the possibility
of actually implementing this just for on farm methane?
Well, under that, that previous work program
that I talked about, which was under the,
the previous government, yes.
That it was looked at purely as a system for
dealing with agricultural methane.
So that's biogenic methane.
Okay. So it was looked at in isolation.
Alright. Um, Mr. Bates,
Thanks chair. Thanks
Cara for the presentation.
Uh, one question on the tradable scheme.
Uh, was there any consideration in a wider context than
just, uh, the impact on the environment, uh, considered such
as the impact it would have on the reduction
of jobs in New Zealand?
Is this in relation to the methane,
Uh, as no, in relation to a tradable scheme versus the,
the current policy settings?
Yeah, so, so if I am applying the example
that I was talking about there,
where we looked at it in relation
to agricultural emissions pricing,
we did think about it broader than the environmental effect.
So thinking about, obviously as I said, it,
it's an effective tool to reduce emissions,
but the actual impacts,
and in this instance the impacts on the agricultural sector
would've been ex significant.
It would've essentially been a cap on production which
would've had significant flow on effects for, you know,
farms and the wider sector which would've affected the
profitability of in individual farms,
but also the overarching sector,
which obviously is a significant contributor
to New Zealand's economy.
Thank you Mr. Herandez. Uh,
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, it seems to me that the, um,
submitters were basically just trying to reinvent the ETS
but from a consumer side rather than the current ETS we
have, which is on the production side of things, um, that,
you know, the kind of endpoint that we have, uh,
'cause they were proposing like a kind of uh,
binding cap which kind of slowly went down,
which is quite similar to
how DETS is currently designed now, is it not?
That's correct. It is, it is quite a similar system.
What's different between sort
of a quota system versus the emission trading scheme is
that the emissions trading scheme has
flexibility built into it.
So it allows participants
and the sectors that are covered within the ETS to determine
where the lease cost reduction is versus a, a cap
through a quota is a much harder cap on production
and there's less ability for that flexibility, which is
what we've got within the emissions trading scheme.
But inherently you're absolutely correct, it is,
it is a similar, similar system in terms of having a cap
and the ability to trade as well.
So last week, um, we heard from Energy Resources OTRI
and we, we discussed that they were quite dismissive
of anything that, um, tried to measure
energy outputs.
Um, that may not, well not dismiss it,
but that was where our conversation went.
Um, we talked about the RUC, um,
the Rux road user charges that are gonna be implemented
for all vehicles.
Um, and is this, uh,
this was a pretty similar scheme to this, isn't it?
The, the right where You, where you purchase,
where you purchase your miles before they happen.
So wouldn't it be a similar scheme
where you would actually be given your emissions, um,
and then they, um,
so many emissions and then you can trade them?
Is isn't this a similar system?
I think it's actually more, more similar to the,
the fishing quota system.
Um, would probably be a more comparable example where
basically, you know, fishermen are given a quota of X amount
for different species.
In this instance, you'd be given, uh, a quota of X
for the energy use.
So I think in that, that it's probably more comp compar
comparable to the phishing quota system than the
the road use charger.
Road use charger system.
Yeah. 'cause there's no limit with the road use charges.
Alright, well, well that, that's,
that's a better analogy too.
That didn't come up last week.
Well, so given that that's a scheme that is
well in place and in fact world leading
and uh, uh, my understanding is being sort of copied
around the world, um, would this be a similar scheme?
Is this is something that we, if it, we got this right
here just even in relation to agriculture,
but could, could become something
the rest of the world would look at.
'cause at the moment many of them are struggling
with their own agricultural emissions.
Is that, is that a fair, fair to say?
Absolutely, and, and when we're looking at other
countries, I think they've got a different emissions
profiles than New Zealand where, you know, over half
of our emissions come from agriculture.
But definitely in terms of what we do with New Zealand and,
and how we address agricultural missions is very much
something that the rest of the world are looking at
because we are leading in, in that space.
And, and as I said, when we were previously under the,
the last government looking at agricultural emissions
pricing as part of the AKA IOA partnership,
it was definitely something that
that was look really keenly looked at
by, by other countries.
And so if New Zealand was to the government was to opt
to look at a quota system for, for agriculture,
I think other countries would be really interested.
And, and, and in that case,
would something like this be what you would look at?
As I said, uh, when, when we worked on that program, uh,
we, we decided it wasn't, uh, a suitable option on the basis
of the wider impacts that it has on,
on the agricultural sector.
While it's effective in term it would likely be effective
in reducing emissions.
The, the wider impacts on farmers
and the wider sector were just untenable in terms of what
that would mean for kind of rural, our rural economy and,
and our wider national economy.
Well, isn't that gonna be true of any
on-farm emissions trading scheme
or anything that's designed to reduce emissions?
I think that really depends on, on the pricing system that
that's being taken forward.
And at this point in time there's no active policy work, uh,
happening on, on agricultural emissions price.
Alright. Look Received from ministers.
Look, look. Well thank you very much
and thank you for that opportunity, um, um, to explain, um,
the, the work that's been done in particular
and what's been considered.
So thank you very much. Um, thank you
So much for having me.
Right. Well.